Cookbook guide for ssd1306 OLED (#177)
OttoWinter/esphomedocs: cookbook/oled.rst

A guide to using SSD1306 OLED display

> ===========================

Reviewer: The length of the header line must match the title length, so add a couple of `=` here (until it matches the text above). Also for other items here.

| All the info in this guide can be found in the documentation :doc:`ssd1306_i2c </components/display/ssd1306_i2c>` and :doc:`Display </components/display/>`. 

> | In this article i will show some practical examples on how to use it, and maybe it can help beginners getting started using this display. The documentation will have more in depth info on all the options available.

Reviewer: `i` -> `I`
Or even better, no I: `This article will show some ...`

| These displays are pretty cheap on `AliExpress <https://www.aliexpress.com/item/10pcs-0-96-yellow-blue-0-96-inch-OLED-module-New-128X64-OLED-LCD-LED-Display/32638669209.html>`__ and they are quite bright.
| There is also a 1.3" version with same resolution that should work with the same config as this one, however i have not tested personally yet.
|
| The display used in the pictures is a dual color display. X 0-127 through Y 0-15 are yellow pixels, the rest are blue. There are different versions of the display.

> | The display itself is a 0.96” OLED unit that connects to your ESP via `i2c`, you will need to add `i2c` configuration to your node.

Reviewer: \`i2c\` -> \`\`i2c\`\` - literals are with double backticks in rst.

| It has 4 pins that needs to be connected: ``GND``, ``VCC`` (3.3v), ``SCL`` and ``SDA`` (some of them have a misprint and the SCL pin says SCK for some reason)

.. figure:: images/oled-xy.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%
The XY orientation of the display.

Configuration
_______________

i2c:
*********
If you don't know the i2c address for your display:

.. code-block:: yaml

    i2c:
      sda: D5
      scl: D6
      scan: true

Set ``scan: true`` if you don’t know the address of your display and check the log for the node:

> | **[11:54:53][C][i2c:043]: I2C Bus:**

Reviewer: Please put this in a ``code-block``

```rst
.. code-block::

    [11:54:53][C][i2c:043]: I2C Bus:
    ...
```

| **[11:54:53][C][i2c:044]:   SDA Pin: GPIO14**
| **[11:54:53][C][i2c:045]:   SCL Pin: GPIO12**
| **[11:54:53][C][i2c:046]:   Frequency: 50000 Hz**
| **[11:54:53][I][i2c:048]: Scanning i2c bus for active devices...**
| **[11:54:53][I][i2c:055]: Found i2c device at address 0x3C**
|
| Take note of the address and set ``scan: false`` again.

> | **(The board used in this example is a Wemos D1 mini, so adapt pins to the board you are using)**

Reviewer: Don't emphasize the whole sentence, if at all (looks overly aggressive in docs).
Maybe just the last part after `so`

Author: The document system doesn't seem to "respect" line breaks without the | its a bit limiting in that sense :-p

Node config:
*********

| The configuration for your node should look something like this: 

> | (your basic node configuration, eg network and such is not discussed in this guide):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| (your basic node configuration, e.g. network and such is not discussed in this guide):
```

    font:
      - file: "roboto.ttf"
        id: robo12
        size: 12
    image:
      - file: "signal.png"
        id: signal
        resize: 18x18
      - file: "thermo.png"
        id: thermo
        resize: 20x20
      - file: "water.png"
        id: water
        resize: 20x20
    display:
      - platform: ssd1306_i2c
        model: "SSD1306 128x64"
        reset_pin: D0
        address: 0x3C
        lambda: |-
          // Wifi signal
          it.printf(20, 8, id(robo12), "%.0f db", id(wifi).state);
          // signal bars, signal.png
          it.image(0, 0, id(signal));
          // Time
          it.strftime(100, 0, id(robo12), "%H:%M", id(time).now());    
          // LINE, draw a line from X start, Y start, X stop, Y stop
          it.line(0, 14, 128, 14);
          // temperature
          it.printf(20, 30, id(robo12), "%.1f °C" , id(temp).state);
          // Humidity (%% = litteral % sign)
          it.printf(76, 30, id(robo12), "%.0f %%", id(rh).state);
          // waterdrop image, water.png
          it.image(56, 26, id(water));
          // thermometer image, thermo.png
          it.image(0, 26, id(thermo));

In detail:
_________

Sensors:
*******

> .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer: Add an empty line after heading

    sensor:
      - platform: wifi_signal
        name: "WiFi Signal oledtest"
        update_interval: 60s
        id: wifi
      - platform: homeassistant
        entity_id: sensor.outside_temp
        id: temp
      - platform: homeassistant
        entity_id: sensor.outside_rh
        id: rh

| This will set up your sensors, first one is internal from the node, the two next are imported from Home Assistant.

> | Don't give names to sensors you wish to hide from HA (no point duplicating sensors).

Reviewer: Don't use contractions like HA in the docs - in instant messaging it is useful to save space, but not here.

| The wifi sensor can be used in Home Assistant to monitor your node's wifi signal strength.
|
Clock(time):
*******
.. code-block:: yaml

    time:
      - platform: homeassistant
        id: time

| This imports the current time from Home Assistant since ESPs can't really tell what time it is themselves.
|
Font:
*******
.. code-block:: yaml

    font:
      - file: "roboto.ttf"
        id: robo12
        size: 12

| Embeds the roboto font into your sketch, for more sizes make more of the same font with different sizes.

> | You can have multiple fonts and sizes in your sketch. The font used in this example is `Roboto Condensed light <http://allfont.net/download/roboto-condensed-light/>`__

Reviewer: I cannot find a ttf file download link on that website.

Let's use the website from the maker of this font: https://fonts.google.com/?selection.family=Roboto:900&thickness=7&query=roboto&category=Sans+Serif
Or even better the direct download link: https://fonts.google.com/download?family=Roboto

Author: http://allfont.net/download/roboto-condensed-light/#download_font_block

It's there in a zip file, the condensed version doesn't seem to be on the google page. I can add both links i guess. It's not really a big deal what font you use, i was looking for one that looked somewhat ok on a small screen.

Author: If you have no objections i'll leave it as it is, since the page has a download link, can always be changed later

| The .ttf file is put in the same folder as your node config .yaml file.
|
Graphics:
******
.. code-block:: yaml

    image:
      - file: "signal.png"
        id: signal
        resize: 18x18
      - file: "thermo.png"
        id: thermo
        resize: 20x20
      - file: "water.png"
        id: water
        resize: 20x20

| Icons used in this sketch are imported from `MaterialDesigns <https://materialdesignicons.com/>`__ and are the same as are used in Home Assistant.
| The 3 icons used are ``mdi:signal`` ``mdi:water-percent`` and ``mdi:thermometer``
| You will need to download the icons from `MaterialDesigns <https://materialdesignicons.com/>`__ and put them in the same folder as your node config .yaml file is stored.

.. note::

>      The icons from MaterialDesigns can come with a transparent background so you may have to fire up your favorite image editor and give them a white background if they aren't displayed correctly

Reviewer: Insert a blank line after `.. note::`.

Do transparent fonts not work with esphome? I thought they did...

Author: There is something 'strange' with the Mdi icons sometimes. I encountered it, would just show a colored square that matched the resize you have selected in your sketch so i did some ms paint messing about with them and then they came to life. Not sure if its Esphome or material designs that is the culprit.

I have not tested a whole lot of fonts, so for transparent fonts i don't know.

| :doc:`strftime </components/time#strftime>`
|
| ``it.line(0, 14, 128, 14);``
| The line drawn under the wifi signal and clock. From X=0 Y=14 to X=128 Y=14.
| :doc:`Basic shapes </components/display/#basic-shapes>`
|
| ``it.printf(20, 30, id(robo12), "%.1f °C" , id(temp).state);``
| Temperature reading from your chosen Home Assistant sensor. We want 1 decimal so we use "%.1f" process the sensor data (if you want 2 decimals replace 1f with 2f)
|
| ``it.printf(76, 30, id(robo12), "%.0f %%", id(rh).state);``
| Humidity from your chosen Home Assistant sensor. You need the double % sign to print a litteral % sign, decimals on humidity is probably not desirable "%.0f %%"
|
| ``it.image(0, 26, id(thermo));``
| The thermometer image next to the temperature sensor reading
|
| ``it.image(56, 26, id(water));``
| The waterdrop with a % sign inside it next to humidity sensor reading
|

Images:
________________
Some images to illustrate the article:

.. figure:: images/oled-topbar.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

.. figure:: images/oled-temphum.png
    :align: center
    :width: 80.0%

> References

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See Also
```

______________
:doc:`Display </components/display>`
:doc:`ssd1306_i2c </components/display/ssd1306_i2c>`

> :doc:`Time </components/time#strftime>`

Reviewer: Do not append `#strftime` here, it does not work

> :doc:`Images </components/display/#images>`

Reviewer: Make this into a list please, with `- ` (as in other pages)

> :doc:`Images </components/display/#images>`

Reviewer: Add a disqus directive below this and a `ghedit` one too (see other docs pages)
